 The Flip is an editorial-style podcast exploring more contextually relevant insights from entrepreneurs and investors changing the status quo in Africa. Produced and hosted by Justin Norman. The case for crypto with Bundle’s Yele Bademosi In this episode, we talk about cryptocurrency with the co-founder and CEO of Bundle, and the founding partner of Microtraction, Yele Bademosi. Beyond trading and price volitility, what is it about crypto that excites Bademosi and so many others on the continent? Despite the technological underpinnings of cryptocurrency as a whole, many of the buying and selling processes and use cases of crypto today are still quite informal and fragmented. We hear from Bademosi about the work Bundle is doing to build products and use cases that make crypto more accessible, affordable and help bring it into the mainstream. For those less familiar with crypto terminology, we have also published a crypto glossary and we have linked to a variety of definitions in this episode’s transcript, as well. (function(p,l,a,y,s){if(p[a])return;if(p[y])return p[y]();s=l.createElement('script');l.head.appendChild((s.async=p[a]=true,s.src='https://player.backtracks.fm/embedder.js',s))}(window,document,'__btL','__btR')) Listen on Apple Podcasts
Listen on Spotify
Listen on Google Podcasts Thank you to MFS Africa for their sponsorship of this series of conversational episodes. MFS Africa’s competition is with cash, and throughout this series we’ll feature other startups and entrepreneurs who are digitising, better organising, and aggregating analogue and fragmented industries. In this episode, we explore digital savings with PiggyVest’s Odunayo Eweniyi. Tricia Martinez lays out the Dala journey and addresses the problems they were up against. A long conversation on all things entrepreneurship in Africa. Perspectives from African investors at every level of the funding value chain. In this episode, we explore and unpack the relationship between the tech ecosystem and the media. Why are Japanese investors and corporates interested in early-stage tech, and where may further opportunities lie for startups on the continent?