 Press Office: Mediterrania Capital Partners Mediterrania Capital Partners, the private equity firm focused on growth investments for SMEs and mid-cap companies in North and Sub-Saharan Africa, is pleased to announce that Albert Alsina, the company’s founder and long-time CEO, has launched a new book to share his knowledge and experience of generating value in business. Albert Alsina, the author of Value Creation in Private Equity, said: “Being able to select the right companies in which to invest is crucial, but even more important is the ability to create value and have an impact from the very first day. With this book, I intend to share the key pillars of a very specific methodology that is helping our portfolio companies achieve their next level of growth by tackling a variety of aspects such as purpose, governance, human resources, the three enterprise processes, etc.” The book aims to summarise in eight steps illustrated with real-life cases the value creation model that Mediterrania Capital Partners applies while monitoring the firm’s portfolio companies, supporting them in the definition and implementation of their business plan with a focus not only on the financial aspects of the business but also on intangible drivers like people, innovation, technology and brand. “Regardless of the product or service, the sector and the countries in which they are operating, the systematic implementation of this value creation model helps companies become stronger, more efficient and more profitable while enhancing their long-term growth and competitiveness,” concluded Albert Alsina. Value Creation in Private Equity, available in bookstores in print and digital formats, is intended for private equity and venture capital professionals, investors, entrepreneurs and company owners seeking to create value and improve performance in any business. The book is also available from the official website. Interview with Albert Alsina, CEO and founder of private equity firm Mediterrania Capital Partners. The conference is hosting the top 600 private equity leaders, who represent over $US1.3tn in assets. Corporate governance has been a vital component of environmental, social and governance standards in Africa, regularly implemented to drive job creation and job quality improvements. A selection of African private equity deal, fundraising and exit announcements that came across our desk in May 2020. A selection of private equity deal and fundraising announcements that came across our desk in April 2020. A selection of private equity deal, fundraising and exit announcements that came across our desk in November 2019.