 The Flip is an editorial-style podcast exploring more contextually relevant insights from entrepreneurs and investors changing the status quo in Africa. Produced and hosted by Justin Norman. Accessible and affordable edtech with Eneza Education’s Wambura Kimunyu In this episode, we talk edtech with Wambura Kimunyu, the group CEO of Eneza Education. Throughout the series of episodes, we’re exploring the entrepreneurs in startups digitising informal and fragmented industries on the continent. And for Eneza Education to remain affordable and accessible, it means distributing text-based content to basic mobile phones via SMS, and acquiring customers via radio advertising. We talk to Kimunyu about building a product for low-income students – 70% of whom live in rural areas, the content development and distribution process, balancing available technologies with the needs of their customers, how to price for low-income consumers, and more. (function(p,l,a,y,s){if(p[a])return;if(p[y])return p[y]();s=l.createElement('script');l.head.appendChild((s.async=p[a]=true,s.src='https://player.backtracks.fm/embedder.js',s))}(window,document,'__btL','__btR'))
Listen on Apple Podcasts
Listen on Spotify
Listen on Google Podcasts Thank you to MFS Africa for their sponsorship of this series of conversational episodes. MFS Africa’s competition is with cash, and throughout this series we’ll feature other startups and entrepreneurs who are digitising, better organising, and aggregating analogue and fragmented industries. We hear from Yele Bademosi about the work Bundle is doing to build products and use cases that make crypto more accessible, affordable and help bring it into the mainstream. In nuanced and fragmented environments, how are startups in African markets getting their products and services in the hands of their customers at the last mile? In this episode, we explore and unpack the relationship between the tech ecosystem and the media. Perspectives from African investors at every level of the funding value chain. We speak to Jihan Abass, the founder and CEO of Lami, an insurance-as-a-service startup based in Nairobi, Kenya. In this episode, we explore digital savings with PiggyVest’s Odunayo Eweniyi.