Amir Ben Yahmed, founder of the Africa CEO Forum PRESS OFFICE: Africa CEO Forum By Amir Ben Yahmed, founder & president of the Africa CEO Forum Like most economic sectors the world over, Africa’s financial industry took a beating in 2020. Particularly vibrant prior to the pandemic, with banking income growing by 11% per year, the industry has since become a leading source of aid for businesses in difficulty, especially state-owned enterprises and SMEs. As a result, Moody’s has warned that the amount of non-performing loans on the books of African banks could double from 2019 levels. Despite this negative outlook, the financial industry will not be the biggest casualty of the ongoing crisis, even if the worst of the shock is yet to come. Banks have so far demonstrated unprecedented resilience, as their equity capital base is stronger and liquidity higher than during the last financial crisis, and their profitability remains well above the global average, while proactive steps taken by governments and central banks have relatively shielded them from the global downturn in economic activity. Meanwhile, mobile money operators and fintech firms have been reaping maximum rewards as the adoption of digital tools becomes widespread. Countless African fintech firms, including Pineapple, Paystack, InTouch and Yoco, have persuaded investors and new customers alike that their services have a promising future. This unconventional past year presents a number of challenges for Africa’s financial industry going forward, and I would like to highlight three of them in particular: But let’s not forget that the industry is currently undergoing a radical transformation. The global financial industry continues to digitalise, transform and reinvent itself. Innovations such as blockchain technology and cryptoassets, the ability to collect and process an almost infinite amount of data and the use of artificial intelligence are invariably leading us towards ever more decentralised finance, or DeFi. In Africa, as elsewhere, this revolution is underway. A study jointly conducted by Deloitte and the Africa CEO Forum is edifying in this respect: close to 70% of the continent’s financial institutions reported that launching or accelerating the digitalisation of their business has become their top strategic priority since the pandemic hit. And that’s just the beginning. Thought- and discussion-provoking topics, from convergence to digitalisation, to integration and technological revolutions, will be high on the minds of 500 of the industry’s top leaders at the inaugural Africa Financial Industry Summit this coming 10 and 11 March. This first-of-its-kind dialogue between all stakeholders will be a welcome opportunity to come together to meet the challenges facing the industry both now and in the future. Organised by the AFRICA CEO FORUM, in partnership with the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the first edition of The Financial Industry Summit will be held online on 10-11 March 2021. With Africa swinging into action to strengthen regional integration, the choice of Rwanda matches the AFC’s desire to facilitate meetings and encourage business flow between CEOs. The continent’s leading decision-makers will once again be gathering in the Ivorian economic capital of Abidjan. For women to take their place in the African private sector sustainably and irreversibly, we must have the courage to start at the top. The partnership with the Africa CEO Forum highlights IFC’s new strategic orientation on creating markets, which includes placing Africa’s development at the heart of its priorities. Leading decision-makers from industry, finance and politics, will come from more than 70 countries to discuss regional integration along with other key topics for the development of Africa’s businesses.